called interstellar travel um and it's
somewhat ironic that we're all
trapped at home at the moment uh largely
and here we are talking about traveling
across the cosmos to
other stars and planets in our galaxy or
beyond
um but anyway interstellar travel will
we
ever be able to reach the stars
and the title screen here is from the
movie
interstellar with their rather
interesting warp drive
spacecraft uh that has gone out to visit
the little planet there that's orbiting
the giant black hole called gargantuar
in their fictional tale
but uh bringing it back down to earth
and uh
credit to uh brian lister for a couple
of these slides at the beginning here
this is one of his if you were to travel
at the speed of sound 768 miles an hour
in english money uh 1200 kilometers per
hour
in metric um then you
uh you know would be the speed of one of
these jet fighters here which
is just breaking the sound barrier and
causing huge
condensation in its shock wave and
that's a very high speed
for ordinary earthly matters
so if you were doing that how long do
you think it would take to fly around
the world
once if you were traveling at speed of
sound well the answer is just 33 hours
so just over one day to travel right
round the earth
in a jet fighter but of course you
wouldn't have enough fuel you'd have to
slow down and refuel several times
in reality but 33 hours
take you around around the earth as long
as you have the fuel for it
we've tried to fly right around the sun
and again
thanks to brian for this slide uh one
lap around the outside of the sun
flying quite close to the surface but
just enough so you didn't get
uh fried would take you 147 days at the
speed of sound so it shows that the um
the sun is really rather larger than the
earth
so suddenly these numbers are starting
to get really quite big
and that's not the length of time to fly
to the sun that's flying around the sun
but what if we decided we were going to
fly not to
the sun but all the way to the nearest
star system
and that would be our nearest neighbor
the alpha centauri system
and if it's a system of three stars
there's a very
sun-like star the yellow g-type star
uh the a member of the trio
the slightly fainter b member is an
orange dwarf star
so a little bit smaller about 70 percent
the mass of our sun
and a little bit cooler and then they
are orbited
much further away from their center of
gravity but nearer to us
by a little red dwarf star proxima
centauri so named because it is in fact
the nearest star to the sun and the
distance from
the sun to proxima is 4.2
light years now we've suddenly changed
units now to
talking about the distance that
light can travel in a year so what is
that
well a light year you can work out
based on the speed of light you're
traveling
300 000 kilometers every second
for a whole year so if you multiply out
how many seconds there are in a year
you get 365.25 times 24
times 60 times 60 which is 31 million
557 400 seconds
and if you multiply that by
300 000 kilometers then a light year
in round numbers works out at 9.3
with a whole bunch of zeros on the end
of it
which i'm going to approximate as 10
trillion kilometers that is a very large
number indeed
and so the question is for our jet
fighter
if it uh magically were able to fly
out of the earth's atmosphere and
continue on at the same speed
and fly towards the nearest star
and let's uh also magically have it set
off around about the time that
stonehenge was built in the neolithic
period
how far do you think it would have
progressed from the sun
to alpha centauri in the intervening
8 600 years well
it won't really have got very far at all
because
for 8 600 years at
the speed of sound i've done the maths
for you
it works out at 1 100th of a light year
and so it's less than one part in 400
of the distance despite traveling for 8
600 years at that speed so
you would just need to be traveling for
a completely unfeasible length of time
to manage to get there in a jet fighter
so we need to go rather faster than the
speed of sound
of course we don't use jet fighters to
go to space
for the obvious reasons that they need
to breathe
air to burn with their fuel what we use
is chemical rockets
which take both the fuel and the
oxidizer with them
and therefore don't depend on sourcing
anything from the environment
and current rocket technology has a
rough
maximum speed that it could get to of
about 100
000 miles per hour so that's about 100
times faster
than the aforementioned jet fighter
in very round numbers but i'm sure you
could work out
that it's still going to take thousands
of years
to travel to the nearest star
on the basis of only going a thousand
times faster
than an f-16
so here's a little uh schematic of a
chemical rocket and the way it works
it carries its fuel and its oxidizer in
the two
colored tanks pumps them into the
combustion chamber
ignites them and they super heat
and come rushing out of the exhaust at
very high speed
and you can work out what the thrust of
a
rocket is going to be and it depends
purely on
the
velocity of the exhaust gas and the mass
of the
a mass flow rate of the rocket and the
pressure in the nozzle
and there's a formula for it there and
you can work
out an amount of thrust that a given
rocket can give
for a given design carrying a certain
amount of fuel and so on
and it's measured in this units called
the specific impulse
and a rocket can give you about 500
sp in the specific impulse units
okay and we'll compare that with some
other designs
as we go forward but we have got a few
rocket-powered probes that have left
earth and of heading out of the solar
system
we have voyager 1 and voyager 2 that
you'll all have heard of
and also pioneer 10 and pioneer 11 from
a slightly earlier generation of
spacecraft
um the uh they're all heading in
different directions
out of the solar system out of the reach
of the effect of the
solar wind from the sun which is really
the
edge point of the control
zone that the sun has influence over and
where that solar wind runs out of uh
puff
is called the termination shock where it
is colliding with the
interstellar medium the thin gas between
the stars
and it runs out of momentum and finally
comes to a halt
and of those they're all into that
termination boundary shock region and in
fact both the voyagers have now
overtaken the pioneers because they're
traveling at a higher speed
and are the farthest out um
and have officially left the solar
system
so voyager 1 was launched in 77
and is now 150 astronomical units
from the sun neptune is 30
so that's five times further away
than neptune now and it crossed the
termination shock in 2004
so it's well outside the solar system
now and the termination shock turned out
to be at about 100
astronomical units and it's traveling
away from us
3.6 astronomical units every year that's
61 000 kilometers
every hour
it'll carry on going and it'll reach the
earth cloud
that realm of the distant comets where
things like comic neo wise
may have come from and it's going to
take about 300 more years to get to that
to the eort cloud and voyager 2 is not
far behind it was
also launched in 77 and it's now 123
astronomical units away and moving
slightly slower at 55 000 kilometers per
hour
we know where the pioneers are but we're
no longer in contact with them
we lost contact with them with their
radios some time ago now whereas we're
still in touch
with the voyagers and we should also
mention
the other deep space
craft that we've got new horizons which
flew past pluto and then
flew past 2014 mu-69 or arrow cough as
they've now named it
the little asteroid the snowman shaped
one
and that is traveling and
going to leave the solar system as well
and it's doing 47
000 kilometers per hour now so it's
slower than both the voyages
um but it's still on a similar sort of
uh
exiting the solar system trajectory
so those are some of the fastest moving
objects that we've ever created
traveling at those sorts of speeds in
the the region of
60 000 kph
40 000 miles an hour still not as fast
as the theoretical
best we could get out of a rocket which
would be a hundred thousand
but still nowhere near enough to really
sensibly
go anywhere other than the solar system
what we need is more power in the pro
propellant stage to accelerate the thing
to go
faster and obviously one way of doing
that is to use a nuclear
source if we go to a
nuclear reactor and we were to take
some propellant in the form of hydrogen
as in this schematic and heat it by
letting it
flow over the very hot bed of
a an ordinary nuclear reactor it would
cool the reaction of the reactor and
stop it from melting
but heat the hydrogen and the hydrogen
would come out of the
nozzle at the back having picked up a
terrific amount of energy
and we reckon that a design like this
can give us
double that specific impulse it gets us
up to a figure of a thousand
so twice as much as a uh
normal chemical rocket could achieve but
it's still not really
very uh much in terms of the sort of
numbers we need uh
not double that of a chemical rocket
we really want a thousand times more so
people have looked at a variety of other
designs
as an israeli team that realized they
could
do a similar thing using a different
nuclear fuel using the artificial
element americium
sometimes that's used in smoke detectors
in the home
in microscopic amounts you'd have to
collect
several tens of millions of smoke
detectors to have enough to build a
reactor
but um it can result in
quite an efficient design of a nuclear
heat engine
giving very high exhaust velocity and
therefore getting us up
from a thousand to 2500 on the specific
impulse with
this type of nuclear engine and so
that's beginning to get there
but other types of
design using nuclear that have been
around since
the 1960s there was project orion
and the idea of project orion was to
build a spacecraft with a big
shield on a lot of shock absorbers
underneath it as shown in the picture
and explode nuclear bombs underneath the
tail
and just keep dropping another nuclear
bomb out and blowing it up underneath
your
shield plate and the the force of the
explosion would propel you
forwards um and they took this very
seriously for a while
the the idea was even that it could drop
small nuclear bombs
to take off and drop a series of them
detonating them in the atmosphere and
get itself up to orbit that way
and then carry on doing the same thing
in space
but fortunately both both of those
activities were banned with
international treaties the
inter planetary treaty
ban on nuclear weapons in space and the
atmospheric test ban
both got paid to this rather crazy idea
because the just the amount of uh
radiation
would never have been uh tolerated
uh they did try and do calculations to
suggest that it really would only add
a very small number of extra
cancers across the whole world if you
launched a spacecraft but
uh just you know by the time they were
talking about this people were
very anti any form of uh nuclear power
anyway so it was never really going to
get
anywhere certainly never get off the
ground
but of course in the same way that an
atom bomb it was superseded by the
h-bomb
using nuclear fusion as its power these
sorts of designs
if they could achieve a nuclear fusion
powered
engine that would take tanks of
hydrogen or heavy hydrogen deuterium
and fuse it by crushing it together
somehow
inside a reaction vessel could produce
even better thrust than anything based
on nuclear fission
partly because the weight of the fuel is
so much less
for the amount of energy that you get
and have been a number of designs for
fusion
powered machines
project daedalus and this particular one
project daedalus icarus
was a two-stage nuclear fusion
powered rocket so the giant spheres here
are the fuel hot containers holding
hydrogen
and the big reaction vessel and the bell
on the rear there is uh the
obviously the exhaust so they would
react the
pellets of hydrogen or
a continuous stream of hydrogen together
confining it with a magnetic field on
zapping it with
intense laser beams to trigger the
fusion off
and the energy would heat the exhaust
gas
to tremendous temperatures and come
rushing out the back
and the idea with two stages is that you
can discard part of the apparatus once
the
main fuel tanks are empty and you don't
have to drag the dead weight of all the
extra fuel tanks along with you
here's a another picture of the same
thing
so as i said you can see labeled right
in the center there the pellet injector
so we're going to store liquid hydrogen
in the tanks
and then compress it down into little
pellets
and inject them into the
fusion chamber which was then either
going to use lasers or electron guns
or magnetic fields or possibly a
combination of them
to try to compress the material enough
to trigger fusion and ride along on a
beam of nuclear
powered exhaust and
this was been studied very intensely
right through into the 1970s into the
80s even
looking at what the technology could
achieve and
if you could build a spacecraft like
this then
you could probably get to one of the
nearby stars
barnard star six light years away in 50
years
and 50 years is probably not an
unreasonable
time frame for keeping in contact with
a a space mission wouldn't necessarily
be
one that you would want to be part of
the crew of going out for that length of
time
but for an unmanned mission it might be
possible
unfortunately the design of this
spacecraft is for really quite a big
machine here it is compared to a saturn
v
rocket now you would never build it on
the ground and then try and launch it
you'd build it in space
but you can see that this thing is 50
000 tons of material
that you've got to get off the ground
and
each saturn 5 was capable of lifting
about one ton
so you'd need a lot of rocket launches
to take up the raw materials
to build such an immense machine even if
you could make it work
but if you could make the system work
and you could get the
hydrogen fusion reactor as in this
schematic to work
generating this uh fusion in the center
and the exhaust out of the back
contained by the magnetic field
of the enormous coils that you've got
going around it in this cutaway diagram
then uh it has a specific impulse
of 130 000
so you will remember that that was a
figure of 500 for a chemical rocket
this is 130 000
and so with this you could continue to
power your spacecraft
and reach maybe 10 or 12 percent the
speed of light
very very fast indeed and a very worthy
result in terms of traveling to the
nearby stars
that's the sort of speed you need to
reach
another idea for this was not to bother
taking the fuel with you
but to capture it as you went along a
so-called buzzard
ramjet named after the man who suggested
it
what he's had was a fusion-powered tail
on this thing that was uh doing all of
the things we've just talked about of
fusing hydrogen together
but instead of a fuel tank he had a
giant
scoop on the front possibly with
enormous magnetic field
scoops around it to capture
hydrogen from the interstellar gas and
funnel it in and then feed it through
do fusion to it and have it come out of
the back
and that design when we use that
in air breathing environments in the
atmosphere it's called a ram jet
where the uh you don't have a fan
pulling the air in at the front you just
use the speed of the
moving craft to capture the air
and ram it into the nozzle in the front
and so this is called a ram jet for
space
it indicates that it is not a pure
rocket design
because it's reliant on its environment
for some of its fuel
and hence ramjet is quite a good name
for it
and when i first heard about this back
in the 1970s and was quite
amazed by the idea but um
never quite convinced of the feasibility
of it because
it always seems to me that the process
of capturing the fuel
at the front with a giant dish even
if that dish was a magnetic mesh or
something
um you would be constantly
suffering a degree of drag as you
swept through the thin gas and tried to
sweep it
up you'd be capturing that gas and and
it would sap your momentum
continuously and i thought that might
make the process relatively
inefficient and indeed
the ultimate sort of hydrodynamic
simulations with supercomputers when
they finally came along
tended to suggest that uh this
type of design really wouldn't work the
the effort you'd expend in collecting
the fuel
would probably exceed the value of the
fuel that you collected
in terms of power generation um
so if you were trying to sweep it up
with a magnetic field you'd have to use
so much electricity to generate that
magnetic field that
it really uh wouldn't be efficient at
all
so what can we do to make our spacecraft
go even faster than a nuclear fusion
powered
rocket well we could use an antimatter
powered rocket
antimatter is the uh opposite
partner of ordinary matter where the
we have anti-protons with negative
charge in the nucleus and
positrons which are anti-electrons
carrying a positive charge going around
the outside of them
and if you marry up two
particles one matter and one antimatter
particle together
then they annihilate via e equals m c
squared all of the mass m is turned into
a terrific amount of energy
e c being the speed of light and c
squared being a very very large number
you get a lot of energy for not very
much
mass which is just what you want for a
fuel
in comparison to um uh fusion
this process is nearly a hundred percent
uh well it is a hundred percent
conversion of the mass
you lose some of the uh potential
because it comes out in the wrong
directions in the form of neutrinos that
you can't focus
so you can probably get about 40 percent
efficiency
out of this you get about 40 percent of
the energy
whereas nuclear fusion gives you about
1.4
something like that of the uh starting
mass
turned into energy and so with a
antimatter powered
rocket engine you wouldn't need very
much fuel and you could get to
30 to 40 percent the speed of light uh
reasonably easily
the only problem is that we can make
antimatter
um we make it one or two atoms at a time
and that's really not very much because
uh in a sugar cube you've probably got
uh 10 with 20 zeros after it of atoms
and if we're making them one at a time
with a particle accelerator it works out
to be
the most expensive uh material
ever if you thought gold was expensive
well
antimatter is around about
10 trillion dollars per microgram
to manufacture so unless we could find
out a better way of manufacturing the
stuff
uh nobody's ever really going to be
burning it in a reactor anytime soon
but uh there are some projects
theoretical projects going on at the
moment project icann and project aimstar
looking at using antimatter in limited
quantities to
trigger nuclear fusion in ordinary
fusion fuel
so it's kind of hybrid engine between a
uh
fusion and an antimatter engine and uh
that might reduce the cost a bit but
it's still going to be prohibitively
expensive i think
so if we can't do any better than that
and we can't use antimatter because it's
too expensive
we need to think in different ways and
one of them
has been tried this is project
ikeros spelt differently
and this is a solar sail spacecraft
using the power of light from the sun
reflecting off of a square solar sail
and the probe was launched in the
direction of venus and has used the
solar sail
to provide some additional
oomph some additional thrust not a very
big
solar sail 200 square meters
um and it created a tiny amount of extra
force 1.12
milli newtons of force
but because that's free and doesn't need
any fuel on the spacecraft it's managed
to increase the
speed of the spacecraft by 890 miles an
hour
for nothing during its time so
it's a technology demonstrator really of
the idea that
you could
not use a traditional fuel but ride on a
light beam
and certainly this would be one way of
delivering
space probes around the solar system if
you don't mind
too much how long they take if you just
want to do it very very
economically on fuel so another project
that's on the go at the moment called
project light sail 2
there was a light sail one a technology
demonstrator
but lightsail 2 went up in 2019
carrying one of these little tiny
cubesat payloads
and went up deployed its
solar sail and has been using the
thrust of the solar radiation hitting
the solar sail
to carry itself into a higher orbit
around the earth
and they're doing experiments with it to
work out how to control it
to start with i had one or two tricky
moments
with it tumbling um and becoming
uncontrollable but
that's part of the reason that uh you do
these sorts of things to
see if they can be made to work
and then here we have three
people yuri miller on the left stephen
hawking obviously
and freeman dyson and this was the
announcement of the breakthrough
initiative as funded by
yuri miller uh he's a russian
billionaire
he put a hundred million dollars of his
own money on the table and then tried to
find additional funding from other
sources to go with it
to attempt to answer that big question
are we alone in the universe
now various ways of doing that some
ground-based
radio astronomy uh seti type
radio dishes listening for the
possibilities of signals from space
but they also were looking at funding
what they called the breakthrough star
shot
which was an attempt to send a probe
or multiple probes to the nearest stars
and to try and reach them within 20
years
now to do that you need to travel at 20
percent
the speed of light one-fifth of the
speed of light
four light years 20 years roughly
you have to allow for acceleration and
of course you have to think about
whether or not you want to slow down
when you get there or whether it's just
going to whiz past
but the speed as it says works out to be
140 million
miles an hour and
the idea is to have your solar sail
or your light sail attached to the
spacecraft
and ride on a laser beam so he'd launch
it up into
low earth orbit then unfurl the
solar sail and zap it with a laser from
the ground
and so it would fly away from earth
riding on this laser beam being
propelled by
it the laser beam carries energy
and bouncing the laser beam off the sail
especially if you make the sail nice and
shiny that's the best way
you can make the uh photons bounce back
and transfer momentum to the
um light sail and you can get to
uh fast enough to reach proxima centuri
in 20 years
so the idea would be you would
put your satellite together and
you would have an enormous array of
lasers
on the ground you need a gigawatt power
station to power the lasers
and the
can focus it onto the
spacecraft but there are a number of
issues with this
um one is that uh the laser can't see
the whole sky at once because the earth
turns
as amateur astronomers you know that
things rise and set
and so you would have to have several of
these
laser arrays scattered around the earth
they would have to take over from each
other
um as each one became in the right
position to
provide the thrust to the departing
spacecraft
but it's a much better idea than trying
to fly to the stars with a rocket
because it doesn't have to take the fuel
with it now the
rockets need to use 99.99
of the available fuel just to get out of
the solar system
um in terms of climbing out of the
gravity well
um and most of the fuel is actually
concerned with launching most of the
other parts of the fuel
and hardly any of it ends up in the
actual payload
but here we could launch the satellites
into low earth orbit and then
the fuel supply stays on the ground
now there are some problems with
that much laser energy going up through
the atmosphere
um and so some people have suggested
well
it might be better to put the lasers in
space
and build a giant laser cannon in space
that wouldn't have to suffer
the uh depredations of traveling through
the thick part of the earth's atmosphere
and uh giving it some difficulties of
aiming and
dispersion and so on but
i'm not too sure that i really want to
see somebody building a giant laser
cannon in space
just to transmit a space probe like this
it would be
a very efficient way of doing it um
but we've seen this sort of design
before in uh
bond fiction there's uh on the left from
diamonds are forever
it's stavro blofeld's laser cannon
zapping the earth
uh pointing the thing downwards and
in the later movie goldeneye the same
sort of idea
i think it uh opened up and fired an
enormous laser cannon down at
people that uh were deemed to be the
enemy
so well at least if you build one on the
ground
you can't then turn it into a weapon
very easily
likewise you don't want to build it on
the moon and have somebody take it over
and fire it back at the earth
you could put it on the far side of the
moon but if you put it on the far
side of the moon then for 14 days you
might find that
it was pointing the wrong way and you
wouldn't be able to power your
spacecraft
which would cut down the amount of
thrust by a factor of two
so there's quite a number of issues with
this whole idea of
building a giant laser cannon
for the spacecraft they want to send
look like this they're called the
breakthrough
star chip it's a tiny credit card sized
printed circuit board
with some chips on it and a little uh
sensor there for picking up some lights
from the laser beam to power it
um and it would contain all of the
necessary
electronics processor memory and radios
to allow it to communicate back to us
and it would have small lasers on it
that would be able to also
uh be used to do steering so it
actually has the ability to steer as
well as
guide itself and talk back to us using
the antenna
in the form of the solar sail so all of
this is
is possible and we should be able to
make these
in large numbers cheaply enough to
launch
not just one but a whole swarm of them
and the reason that matters
is because if you're traveling at uh 20
percent of the speed of light
and you hit a particle of dust mining
its own business
in interstellar space the
energy of that collision is enough to
destroy the spacecraft in many cases
and so we would harden them as much as
possible
against impacts but reckon to lose
quite a large number of them along the
way and so the idea would be to launch
maybe a thousand of them in a swarm
and power them all off one laser on the
ground and just hope that some of them
make it through to
the destination and that would work
because
lord they're so small and cheap you
could launch a thousand of them
on a modest number of rockets
in the same way that uh elon musk has
been launching his
um starlink satellites about
60 or 100 at a time on his
falcon x rockets into low earth orbit
recently
so that demonstrates that the first
stage works
and the solar sail projects that are
going around the solar system
prove that the idea of riding a light
beam works
and that the physics and maths are
correct all we need is the giant laser
and then unfortunately the giant lasers
the expensive part
and so here's a little diagram with a
logarithmic
scale on it showing the distances going
through the solar system from the sun
outwards
neptune there at 30 astronomical units
saturn at 10.
the voyager spacecraft well they're at
123 and 150 now
just outside that uh boundary the
termination shock and the heliopause the
limits of the sun's
magnetic field and they're on their way
towards the earth cloud which goes from
a thousand
to a hundred thousand astronomical units
and then it's very neatly around about 1
million au
to get a very long way indeed
out into space on this diagram
but that's not really very helpful in
terms of planning
where we might go other than the nearest
star alpha centauri
so how far is it well here's a little
plan
of the possible route maps that you
might take
with your uh solar sail or your laser
sail
spacecraft with the distance is on you
can see it's 4.3
to go to alpha centauri uh barnard star
is next at 5.9
light years and then there are a number
of choices
we could go to wolf 359 another red
dwarf
star at 7.6 we could go to sirius
at 8.7 light years leyland
21 185 at 8.1
uh epsilon indy 11.2
and others out beyond that so the
question really is
what out of all of these are the
prime targets that we might want to go
to
and i've listed what i think the prime
targets should be
for such things on the next slide
so obviously we should go to alpha
centauri there are three stars there
and one of them proxima is known to have
an earth-like
planet so we have to send a probe there
but it would also be very very
interesting to discover if
uh either a or b had their own planets
as well
and to target a mission to fly by
all of the uh members
of the alpha century system the reason i
i mention that specifically is because
some like stars like
a um are obviously of interest because
they're just like our own but
b is an orange k1 type
dwarf star and these can be very very
old and live a very long time
with a sensible habitable zone and if
if i was a to place a bet i would
bet that the first place that we're
likely to find
alien life is on a
planet around a k type star not a g
type star because of their
very much longer evolutionary
opportunity that they have
i'm very much interested in planets
around
orange dwarf stars i'm not so interested
in red dwarfs because
they tend to have a very narrow
habitable zone they're a bit
feeble and the habitable zone has to be
quite close to them
and they tend to have a lot of x-ray
emitting fl star flares which
mean that
planets that are in the goldilocks zone
not
too near and not too far but just right
in terms of temperature
tend to get bathed in x-rays from these
um
flare star behavior of red dwarfs
so i'm not so keen on the red dwarf so i
definitely think the
key type ones are the place to look
so if we look down the list the next one
is a red dwarf barnard star well yeah
okay we could go there
we haven't really got any idea where
it's got any earth-like planets but it
does
appear to have a couple of planets
around it from various studies
so could be good the next one on my list
is epsilon eridani at 10.8 light years
that's another orange dwarf star and
again we think it has a probable planet
and possibly multiple planets and
multiple asteroid belts
and so that's a very good candidate for
having some sort of
habitable or inhabited or life-bearing
planets there
because of the age of the system older
than the sun
by several billions of years evolution
will have had a lot more time to do its
thing
very interesting one likewise we've got
the next one that comes up tower city at
11.8
light years it's a g8 star similar to
the sun
shown to have five planets well that's
the most
sun-like star and star system with
planets
that we know of nearby so we really
ought to include that one
wolf 106 one well
that's a red dwarf with a super earth
planet in the goldilocks zone
so that's worth checking out
and then gliese 581
three light years uh very famous one
this one it's a red dwarf again
but planet g and d of its multiple
planets
system are both in the star's habitable
zone
and uh g looks a bit like a
roughly earth-sized planet d looks a bit
bigger
and possibly with a bigger magnetic
field and a stronger
atmosphere might be able to protect
itself against the ravages
of the aforementioned x-ray flares from
its
red dwarf parent so i think that's
well worth investigating
gliese 667
is another red dwarf with
yet more planets around it and uh
then finally at the bottom of the list
trappist-1
very famously discovered with seven
earth-like planets
some of which may have liquid water
through being in the habitable zone
but that's also a red dwarf so you can
see the red dwarfs are dominant here
the the only ones that are not red
dwarfs that are
orange or yellow stars so k type and g
type ones are the two members of alpha
centauri
epsilon aridani and tau ceti
so those are my three favorites if i had
to pick any but
these should be the ones we would target
and the question really is how far could
we get
and if we had a breakthrough star
shot aimed at these
which ones would be achievable well
let's
say that we don't quite get to 20
the speed of light that they hope for
let's work on the basis of 16
speed of light and give ourselves a
30-year
time limit and it turns out that
with such parameters you have to go to
alpha centauri because the rest are out
of range
you can't quite get to barnard's star if
those are your parameters
so you either need to go faster which
i'm not sure is very feasible
or you have to have put up with
a multi-generational project and
if we go to 60 years and 16
speed of light then we get a bit more
choice
and we can include barnard star
uv seti wolf 359 or sirius
or leyland 21 185
in our choices so it gives us several
more uh
interesting red dwarfs that we could
visit
we could go to sirius
sirius wasn't on my target list despite
being relatively nearby
because it's only 250 million years
of age um as a star system
and that is far too short a period of
time
really for evolution to have done
anything on any companion planets
plus we don't know that it's got any
companion planets at this point either
so it doesn't make my favorites list
okay let's go to 100 years and now we're
managing to span
most of these and we can get to
epsilon eridani and tau seti my two
favorite other candidates as well as
a few of these others epsilon indies
another interesting one
and these are around about that sort of
11 12 light year
distance that's the sort of distance
that really
gets us into having plenty of choice and
some nice interesting ones to go to
so maybe we go pick them off in order
and go
alpha centauri barnard star for the
first couple
and then well we're going to have to
have a 100 year mission to go anywhere
else
and so if i take my prime target list
and chop it down and color it
in yep those 30-year missions it's only
those two nearby
systems that we can get to
with a 60 to 100 year mission we can do
my two favorites epsilon eridani in
taoseti
and also uh wolf 1061 just
but we need to have 150 year mission to
make it out to the glieser
family at 20 plus light years
and it's going to take 250 years to get
to trappist-1
so i don't think that's terribly
feasible no one's going to choose that
until we've explored all the others
um so really turns out that even with
these
tremendously fast spacecraft doing
a good fraction the speed of light 16
the speed of light is no mean speed
we're really limited to the amount of
exploring that we're actually going to
be able to do
now there is another idea which is to
build
space probes that replicate themselves
with some of what we've got with 3d
printing and so on it's
becoming vaguely possible to build a
machine that can make copies of itself
and if you did this you could send a
probe
out to a system that would report on
that system
but mine the local uh
asteroid field for more material
to make copies of itself and make enough
fuel
and then dispatch slow moving but
multiple copies of itself
to other solar systems and
provided they managed to spread shall i
say like a virus
with an r greater than one so that you
got more than one probe for every probe
then they would soon fill the whole
galaxy with space probes
and uh it would probably take around
about a million years
before the uh they had spread out
and covered a goodly fraction of the
galaxy
and this is an idea that john von
neumann came up with
called von neumann self-replicating
probes
obviously you wouldn't send crews with
any of these types of systems and
it's interesting that if we thought this
idea up
then it's probably been thought of by uh
alien civilizations and
if they were much older than us they
would only have to be
a million years or two ahead of us in
the
technological progression and
the probability would be we would start
to see
their von neumann probes arriving in our
solar system about now um and we haven't
and so we're very puzzled by this the uh
really if there are others so other
civilizations out there
that might have had a multi-million or
even
100 million year head start on the
technology race
compared to where we are then there
really ought to be their von neumann
probes falling out of the sky by now
so we wonder why that hasn't happened is
it because
we are alone in the galaxy or is it
because we are the first
or one of the very early technological
civilizations perhaps the only
technological civilization
in the whole galaxy and
well that's all part of the fermi
paradox where
enrico fermi famous nuclear physicist
once said
where is everybody really hinting as to
why
we haven't seen their von neumann probes
falling out of the sky
perhaps we have and we've just mistaken
them for something else
who knows um so yeah they the idea is
they could spread everywhere
in in a million years or so
there's one thing that i missed out here
which is if you travel
fast enough relative to the speed of
light
then you're going to notice
the effects that relativity has
on the behavior of time and distance
and in particular it appears that
a fast-moving traveler sees distances
get
shorter and sees less time
elapsed in direct relation and in fact
if you traveled
at 100 of the speed of light time would
stop
and distances would appear to shrink to
nothing
and so in zero seconds you would cover
the whole distance as perceived by you
and so an example would be that if we
had an astronaut and we sent them off
in a spacecraft that very rapidly
accelerated
up to 90 percent of the speed of light
cruised somewhere
and then slowed down and
returned after maybe spending a decent
time examining
some distant star system um
then uh perhaps it might be such that it
traveled nine light years it would take
from the earth's point of view
uh around about uh ten years to get
there
traveling at ninety percent of the speed
of light and about ten years for it to
get back
and so we would see the spacecraft
return after 20 years
but the traveler on it would have only
experienced
five years of life
during each of the direction and so they
have aged if they spent a year examining
the uh
the target they only aged two lots of
five plus one
years eleven years in total so
the this is called the twin paradox if
you had two twins you separated them
sent one off on this space mission and
brought them back again
then they would have aged and they would
find that their
otherwise twin was now effectively nine
years
older than them in biological age
and this really is true and it means
that actually
for a crude mission provided you
don't really want to come back and
provided you can travel at a very high
speed then you could use relativity to
make the
journey more palatable to the occupants
of your spacecraft
of course you left on earth would still
have to wait the full duration
so if we could make a spacecraft do
ninety percent of the speed of light
we could explore perhaps um in these
hundred year long missions
and not have the astronauts die of old
age before they arrived
in fact if you go at uh 95 or 99
speed of light then you can have it
arrange it so that the
astronaut hardly ages at all um which is
what you need
you do have all the problems that are
not crashing into anything
and i think that is probably
fundamentally unsolvable problem
um crashing into a tiny grain of dust
with a relative impact velocity close to
the speed of light would be like blowing
yourself up with a hydrogen bomb
so it's just not something you could
cope with
the other idea is to build a truly vast
spaceship
and put a whole colony on it
and then fly to the stars and not worry
about how long it takes
because it's going to be your distant
many generations down the line
descendants
that are going to get there and most of
the people
will live out their entire lives on the
starship
as it travels from one system to another
and this has been popular with many
science fiction writers
the idea of these generation starships
and i think they got into the subject of
really would it would it work would it
make any sense
at all um in terms of the people who
stayed behind
because the chances are that a hundred
generations
down the uh the road on these starships
the reason that you set off in the first
place will have been lost in legend
and uh you could easily find that
they don't bother communicating with the
mother planet anymore
and they all just goes dark after a
while and you don't know what happens to
them
and i think that could be quite a
problem for distant uh
space travelers of whatever form
more speculatively if we can
ever master the uh
some of the wackier ideas of general
relativity we could
build a wormhole and use it to shortcut
the distance
from one point to another in the cosmos
fly through the wormhole and use it both
as
a effectively a a tunnel
from one point to another that would
avoid all of the tedious
space in between and get us around
in no time at all
and such things are theoretically
possible provided you've got
a bundle of negative energy you need
some negative energy
energy that is less energetic than
absolutely nothing
and we don't know how to do that we've
never seen it
not even antimatter has negative energy
it has
positive mass and positive energy so
no weirdness ever observed in physics
can give us the a clue as to how you
would go about building such a thing
but the physics says that it is possible
so
there's quite a conundrum really but if
you could build a wormhole
then you can build half a wormhole and
surf along on it
in the form of a warp drive this is the
physics of star trek and their warp
drive
and it's real it's a real product of
general relativity
that you could bend the space in front
of you
one way and compressing it and expanding
it behind you
and sit in a little bubble of flat space
apparently stationary not moving
but shuffle the space from in front of
you
round to behind you using what's called
an albuquerque warp drive
and again you need a lump of this
negative energy stuff
that we just don't think is uh
there's any real way to possess such but
if you could
then a warp drive is entirely possible
and then finally you've probably heard
in the
press about nasa and the impossible
microwave engine this uh bell-shaped
microwave resonant cavity
this tapered cone on one end they set up
microwave electromagnetic waves bouncing
around inside this thing
and claim that it produces thrust
without any exhaust
now that is against all the known laws
of physics
in that it's a perpetual motion type
machine
it's it's not expending any of its mass
and it's violating newton's laws
in the process but various people have
built these and
claimed that they work and that they get
a non-zero amount of thrust out of it
on the other hand other people say
they've tested them
and that it's all experimental error and
nonsense
i think i'm with the latter i don't
think it's likely that they work at all
but unless we try these things we never
find out
um and i think they were think talking
about
building one of these and putting it up
in space
and seeing if it could drive itself
along
and make uh acceleration
because uh in the earthly environment
it's too hard
to measure the effects and so doing the
experiment in
the uh the vacuum of space where there's
no resistance
is probably the way to find out and if
you could do that well then you can do
away with all that pesky fuel
problem um and have a very very powerful
engine that can just uh
accelerate you to any speed you like
really up to the speed of light of
course
so we're still limited to those uh
relatively nearby
star systems i think that's the
fundamental takeaway from this
uh talk is that unless we can travel
with faster than light through warp
drive
um or wormholes then we're stuck
with our human lifespans
constraining us to exploring
the nearest star systems or sending out
these
multi-generations space arcs to float
the cosmos
and uh just sort of travel until they
find somewhere
where they might decide they wanted to
set up
kemp on the other hand they might decide
they just can't be bothered and stay on
the spacecraft
i just don't think that's necessarily
going to work
anyway that's the end of the talk for
today and
i hope you've enjoyed that uh sort of
examination of the possibilities
of interstellar space travel